Publish starport blockchain app on Digital Ocean (#694)
cosmos/sdk-tutorials: publish-app-do/index.md

As Authentication, access via ssh key is recommended. [Learn how to setup your SSH key](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-ssh-keys-2) and use it as authentication method to access your Droplet.

Optionally add a Droplet name and click "Create Droplet".

In the list of your Droplets you see your new Droplet. Copy the IP address and open your terminal.

In your terminal, you type `ssh root@<IP address>` to access your new node.

### Setup Your Server

First, create a new user that will run the blockchain. You can choose a username, in this example you can use `appuser` as username.

```bash
adduser appuser
```

You will be prompted to enter a new password for appuser. After entering a password, you will be asked for Full Name, Room Number, Work Phone, Home Phone or Others, hit ENTER to use the default values.

The new user is created, to have it all the rights in the system you will need to add it to the `sudo` group.

```bash
usermod -aG sudo appuser
```

To be able to login as the new user, copy your ssh public key to the new users home directory

```bash
rsync --archive --chown=appuser:appuser ~/.ssh /home/appuser
```

> 

Author: switch to your user `su - appuser`

```

which should print

```bash
go version go1.16.5 linux/amd64
```

To use Starport, install the Starport CLI.

```bash
curl https://get.starport.network/starport! | sudo bash
``` 

## Upload your app to the Droplet

There are a few methods available to upload your app to the Droplet. One convinient way might be to upload the app to GitHub and then download it on your Droplet again. Starport creates a new GitHub repository for you to make it convinient to add it to your repositories.

We will upload the files now with `scp`, to avoid a few extra steps. 

On your local machine, use the following command to upload the app directory to your server.

`scp -r <appname> appuser@<IP address>:/home/appuser/`

This uploads your local app to your Digital Ocean droplet, into the `/home/appuser` directory, the home directory of the `appuser`.

After the upload finished, navigate on your Droplet into the `/home/appuser/<appname>` directory.

## Install your app

To install your app and configuration, use the Starport CLI

```bash
cd /home/appuser/<appname>
starport serve
```

This will build your Starport app, create a genesis file and your configuration.
You will see an output similar to

> 

Author: This happens on first run:
```
cannot build app:

	error while running command /tmp/tsc4158630: : context canceled
Waiting for a fix before retrying...
```

Author: @fadeev 👆 FYI: this is an error that occurs when I run `starport serve` on an Ubuntu machine the first time. Aborting and rerunning the process fixes this.

Reviewer: I didn't have this experience...

---
parent:

>   title: Publish your Starport app on Digital Ocean

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  title: Deploy your Starport Chain on Digital Ocean
```

order: 0
description: Publish the Starport blockchain application on an Ubuntu 20.04 droplet on Digital Ocean.
---

# Publish your Starport blockchain app on Digital Ocean

In this tutorial you will learn how to publish your blockchain application on Digital Ocean.

> In the first chapter, create a new Cosmos SDk blockchain with Starport.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the first chapter, create a new Cosmos SDK blockchain with Starport.
```

As Authentication, access via ssh key is recommended. [Learn how to setup your SSH key](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-ssh-keys-2) and use it as authentication method to access your Droplet.

Optionally add a Droplet name and click "Create Droplet".

In the list of your Droplets you see your new Droplet. Copy the IP address and open your terminal.

In your terminal, you type `ssh root@<IP address>` to access your new node.

### Setup Your Server

First, create a new user that will run the blockchain. You can choose a username, in this example you can use `appuser` as username.

```bash
adduser appuser
```

You will be prompted to enter a new password for appuser. After entering a password, you will be asked for Full Name, Room Number, Work Phone, Home Phone or Others, hit ENTER to use the default values.

The new user is created, to have it all the rights in the system you will need to add it to the `sudo` group.

```bash
usermod -aG sudo appuser
```

To be able to login as the new user, copy your ssh public key to the new users home directory

```bash
rsync --archive --chown=appuser:appuser ~/.ssh /home/appuser
```

> To setup your server to install and run the starport app, we will need to install a few tools which will help us to publish your blockchain app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To setup your server to install and run the Starport app, we will need to install a few tools which will help us to publish your blockchain app.
```

Install [Go](https://golang.org/dl/).

At the time of writing the version is 1.16.5.

```bash
cd ~
wget https://golang.org/dl/go1.16.5.linux-amd64.tar.gz
sha256sum go1.16.5.linux-amd64.tar.gz
# b12c23023b68de22f74c0524f10b753e7b08b1504cb7e417eccebdd3fae49061  go1.16.5.linux-amd64.tar.gz
```

Extract the archive and keep it in /usr/local

```bash
sudo tar -xvf go1.16.5.linux-amd64.tar.gz -C /usr/local
```

> You will now have a directory called go in the /usr/local directory. Next, recursively change this directory’s owner and group to appuser:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will now have a directory called go in the `/usr/local` directory. Next, recursively change this directory’s owner and group to `appuser`:
```

    sudo chown -R appuser:appuser /usr/local/go
    ```

1. Add the go paths to your profile:

    ```bash
    nano ~/.profile
    ```

    At the end of the file, add the following two lines:

    ```bash
    export GOPATH=$HOME/go
    export PATH=$PATH:$GOPATH/bin:/usr/local/go/bin
    ```

1. Update your profile:

    ```bash
    source ~/.profile
    ```

1. Verify your go installation:

    ```bash
    go version
    ```

    The results:

    ```bash
    go version go1.16.5 linux/amd64
    ```

1. To use Starport, install the Starport CLI:

    ```bash
    curl https://get.starport.network/starport! | sudo bash
    ``` 
    The latest stable version of Starport is installed. 

## Upload Your App to the Droplet

Several methods are available to upload your app to the Droplet.

One convenient method is to upload the app to GitHub and then download it on your Droplet. Starport creates a GitHub repository that makes it convenient to add your app to your repositories.

To upload the files, you can use `scp` to avoid a few extra steps. 

1. In a terminal window on your local machine, use the following command to upload the local app directory to your DigitalOcean server:

>     `scp -r <appname> appuser@<IP address>:/home/appuser/`

Reviewer: @toschdev I wonder if we should just use `digitalocean` throughout, since we use specific examples later in the tutorial?

Author: oh yes, totally 👍

    This command uploads your local app to your DigitalOcean Droplet to `/home/appuser`, the home directory of `appuser`.

1. In a terminal window on the Droplet, you can change to the `/home/appuser/<appname>` directory after the upload is completed:

    `cd <appname>`

## Install your app

> To install your app and configuration, use the Starport CLI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install your app and configuration on the Droplet, use the Starport CLI:
```

  start               Run the full node
  status              Query remote node for status
  tendermint          Tendermint subcommands
  tx                  Transactions subcommands
  unsafe-reset-all    Resets the blockchain database, removes address book files, and resets data/priv_validator_state.json to the genesis state
  validate-genesis    validates the genesis file at the default location or at the location passed as an arg
  version             Print the application binary version information

Flags:
  -h, --help                help for digitaloceand
      --home string         directory for config and data (default "/home/appuser/.digitalocean")
      --log_format string   The logging format (json|plain) (default "plain")
      --log_level string    The logging level (trace|debug|info|warn|error|fatal|panic) (default "info")
      --trace               print out full stack trace on errors

Use "digitaloceand [command] --help" for more information about a command.
```

## Create a Systemd process

The `starport serve` command helps installing, building, and configuring your app for a new blockchain. You received tokens on newly created accounts.

> This new app is useful only for development purposes and is not intended to be run for a long time in production. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new app is useful only for development purposes and is not intended to be run for an extended time or in production. 
```

> For the app to run for a longer time, you need a `systemd` process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the app to run for a longer time, you need a `systemd` process on your Droplet.
```

Reviewer: I think we're talking about the app in the cloud, right?

Create the log files and a `systemd` file to manage your process so that you can log off from the terminal and be confident the app keeps running even when the server restarts.

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /var/log/digitaloceand
sudo touch /var/log/digitaloceand/digitaloceand.log
sudo touch /var/log/digitaloceand/digitaloceand_error.log
sudo touch /etc/systemd/system/digitaloceand.service
```

Use nano to edit the systemd service file:

```bash
sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/digitaloceand.service
```

Add your application details to the file:

```bash
[Unit]
Description=digitalocean daemon
After=network-online.target
[Service]
User=appuser
ExecStart=/home/appuser/go/bin/digitaloceand start --home=/home/appuser/.digitalocean
WorkingDirectory=/home/appuser/go/bin
StandardOutput=file:/var/log/digitaloceand/digitaloceand.log
StandardError=file:/var/log/digitaloceand/digitaloceand_error.log
Restart=always
RestartSec=3
LimitNOFILE=4096
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

To close and save the file, press Ctrl+x. Then type `Y` and press Enter. 

The next step is to enable the file so the app is available even after a system start:

```bash
sudo systemctl enable digitaloceand.service
```

> Now start the process:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now start the systemd process:
```

Reviewer: I started getting confused at this point, we're starting the systemd process?

Author: yes 👍

```bash
sudo systemctl start digitaloceand.service
```

Check the logs with:

```bash
sudo journalctl -u digitaloceand -f
```

Your app is now running on DigitalOcean.

## Connect your local running chain to the published chain

To connect your local running chain with the published app, you need to:

- Find the node you just created with the IP address
- Download the genesis file
- Configure your app to connect to the published node

On your DigitalOcean droplet, find the hash of the node by typing:

```bash
digitaloceand tendermint show-node-id
# For example, 85ef06cb86aa501cceb9ed0a497a02503f5aa57f
```

Each node has a different node id. 

> At a terminal window back on your local machine, initialize your blockchain with:

Reviewer: we're initializing the LOCAL blockchain app? or ??

Author: yes 👍

Author: That's the blockchain app on your local machine

```bash
digitaloceand init localnode
```

> Next, download the `genesis.json` file from your node:

Reviewer: we're downloading the genesis.json file from the Droplet node to the local machine?

Author: yes 👍

```bash
scp appuser@<IP address>:/home/appuser/.digitalocean/config/genesis.json ~/.digitalocean/config/
```

> Then add the published node ID and IP into the configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then add the published node ID and IP into the configuration file on your local machine:
```

Reviewer: I got a little lost here too, maybe we should clarify on the local machine (why do we do this? give a little context would be helpful)

```bash
nano ~/.digitalocean/config/config.toml
```

Add a persistent connection. Use the node-id from the Droplet together with the IP address and default port:

```bash
# Comma separated list of nodes to keep persistent connections to
persistent_peers = "85ef06cb86aa501cceb9ed0a497a02503f5aa57f@<IP address>:26656"
```

> Start the node:

Reviewer: we're starting local or Droplet node?

Author: That's all locally, the Droplet node is running smooth already 😁

```bash
digitaloceand start
```

> You can use a tool like gex to see if you are connected to a node. You can install gex on your remote and local machine with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use a tool like gex to see if you are connected to a node. You can install gex on your remote and local machine. Run this command at a terminal window on each machine:
```
